The software/firmware for the reader is created in the Arduino environment. The main file is Mimisbrunnur.ino. At the start of that the various software libraries used are detailed. strings.h and styles.h are used to offload some declarations and functions from the main file. icons.h holds the icons used, and FreeSans*.h hold the font in it's four variants.

When reading, the program only processes one page at a time. Styles, that is the formatting applied to the text (margins, font variants, underline etc.) are either preprocessed  and held in memory (for external and internal stylesheets), or ingested along with the page (for inline styles and tags). The program keeps track of the start and end of the page, along with the applicable style, so moving to the next page is simple. Moving to the previous page, however, means scanning through the document from the start to find the beginning of the page in question. This can take a few seconds, particularly near the end of large documents. The same technique is used for finding links within documents, and when skipping around to arbitrary locations.

The program can create and use two types of support files. In the root of the SD card it will place "mimisbrunnur.pos". This file holds the path and filename of the document currently being read, the start of the current page, and any applicable styles. This allows the reader to return to the last known place on startup. This information can be stacked, so that if a link has been followed, it is possible to return to the place it was called from. If bookmarks are created they will be placed in a "*document*.bookmark" file, where *document* is the filename of the document itself.
